feat: update forms doc (#1694)
AmadeusITGroup/otter: docs/forms/FORM_ERRORS.md

# Form errors

Handling the form errors in the Otter context (container/presenter, localization, etc.) is a bit different from creating a form in a component and doing all the logic there.

### Form error store

To have the possibility of displaying inline error messages in the form and also in error panels (on the top of the page, above submit button, etc.),
the best option is to have a dedicated NgRX store for the form errors. This way we can listen to the store state and display the errors anywhere in the page.
The store is provided in the __@o3r/forms__ package. See [Form Error Store](https://github.com/AmadeusITGroup/otter/blob/main/packages/@o3r/forms/src/stores/form-error-messages/form-error-messages.state.ts)
for more details and to view the state object model.

#### Error object model

The store model object extends the `FormError` interface (see its object model below).

- The `FormError` interface contains an identifier for each component that has a form inside, plus the errors associated to that form.

> ```typescript

Reviewer: Should we keep a duplicate of the interface here or add a link to the file with the interface definition?
It will avoid misalignment

# Form errors

### Form error store

To have the possibility of displaying inline error messages in the form and also in error panels (on the top of the page, above the submit button, etc.),

> the best option is to have a dedicated NgRX store for the form errors. This way we can listen to the store state and display the errors anywhere in the page.

Reviewer 2: "The best" is maybe a bit too much ;)

You can find these interfaces [here](https://github.com/AmadeusITGroup/otter/blob/main/packages/%40o3r/forms/src/core/errors.ts).

### Creating an error object

The input component has to implement the [Validator](https://angular.io/api/forms/NG_VALIDATORS) or the [AsyncValidator](https://angular.io/api/forms/NG_ASYNC_VALIDATORS) interface
in order to give us the possibility of defining the error object that will be returned by the form.

The error message structure will be defined in the implementation of the `validate` function.

As the `validate` function should return a [ValidationErrors](https://angular.io/api/forms/ValidationErrors) object, which is a map of custom objects (of type `any`),
we can adapt the returned object to the store of error messages. This will ease the process of adding the errors in the store.

We have to make sure that we provide the `htmlElementId` of the errors in the store that match the __HTML fields__.
To identify a field, we can generate an `id` in the parent component instance, provide it through the input mechanism, and concatenate it with the `formControlName`.

> Since we will have a __unique id__ by instance of the parent component, we are sure to have unique HTML identifiers for the form fields.

Reviewer 2: A link with the showcase code could be nice to include as examples

The object returned by the `validate` function is the error object that is propagated to the parent component.

#### Categories of error messages

There are two types of validators (see [Form Validation](./FORM_VALIDATION.md)) and therefore two categories of error messages:

> - __Custom error__ - set in the parent component

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- __Custom error__ - define in the parent component as it holds the business logic
```

}
```

> - The `ElementError` object contains all the errors associated to the HTML element.

Reviewer 2: Make sure to introduce the ElementError if you remove the code above. If not, please ignore this message :)

> The identifier `htmlElementId` can be used as an anchor link to focus on the HTML element where the validation failed.

Reviewer 2: I guess this is a property from the ElementError interface but this could be stated directly

```typescript

> /** Error messages of the html element identified by its id */

Reviewer: same for this one :)

   * @example

>    * ```typescript

Author: I am removing this code and adding a link to the interface in the code.

   * {required: true}
   * \```
   * @example
   * ```typescript
   * {max: {max 12, actual: 31}}
   * ```
   */
  validationError?: {[key: string]: any};
}

> `````

Reviewer 2: Why 5 `?

You can also find these interfaces [here](https://github.com/AmadeusITGroup/otter/blob/main/packages/%40o3r/forms/src/core/errors.ts).

### Creating an error object

> The presenter has to implement the [Validator](https://angular.io/api/forms/NG_VALIDATORS) or the [AsyncValidator](https://angular.io/api/forms/NG_ASYNC_VALIDATORS) interface

Reviewer 2: If we want to leave out the presenter/container structure, maybe we should instead refer to the presenter here as the input element, or the ControlValueAccessor?

in order to give us the possibility of defining the error object that will be returned by the form.

The error message structure will be defined in the implementation of the `validate` function.

As the `validate` function should return a [ValidationErrors](https://angular.io/api/forms/ValidationErrors) object, which is a map of custom objects (of type `any`),

> we can prepare the returned object for the store of error messages. This will ease the process of adding the errors in the store.

Reviewer 2: Not sure about this one:
```suggestion
we can adapt the returned object to the store of error messages. This will ease the process of adding the errors in the store.
```

We have to make sure that we provide the `htmlElementId` of the errors in the store that match the __HTML fields__.

> For this, the presenter receives an `id` as input and for each field we are concatenating, the `id` with the `formControlName`.

Reviewer 2: maybe we could remove references to the container?

> Since the container sets a __unique id__, we are sure to have unique HTML identifiers for the form fields.

Reviewer: To complement the comment just above
```suggestion
Since the container sets a __unique id__, we are sure to have unique HTML identifiers for the form fields.Since we will have a __unique id__ by instance of the container,  we are sure to have unique HTML identifiers for the form fields.
```

The object returned by the `validate` function is the error object that is propagated to the container.

#### Categories of error messages

There are two types of validators (see [Form Validation](./FORM_VALIDATION.md)) and therefore two categories of error messages:

> - __Custom error__ - set in the container

Reviewer 2: I think it could be worth to add something about why setting an error in the presenter or in the container.

Author: In the form validation file, the difference between the two validators is explained, should I re explain the difference here ?

- __Primitive error__ - computed in the presenter

###### Custom errors

They are returned by __custom validators__ and have the type `CustomErrors` (defined in [__@o3r/forms__](https://github.com/AmadeusITGroup/otter/blob/main/packages/@o3r/forms/src/core/custom-validation.ts)).
This type uses the `customErrors` key with an `ErrorMessageObject` array, which has to contain all the custom errors of a form control or a group.

> ```typescript

Reviewer: Same comment, we should not keep it to ensure alignment with the code

}
```

The error object model returned by the validator has to be compliant with the store model.

```typescript
// Example of returned object by the custom validator

> {customErrors: [{translationKey, longTranslationKey, translationParams}]};

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{
  customErrors: [{
    translationKey: 'o3r-error-message.myField.maxLength',
    longTranslationKey: 'o3r-long-error-message.myField.maxLength',
    translationParams: {
      currentLength: 10,
      maxLength: 5
    }
  }]
};
```

```

###### Basic/primitive errors

The error object structure has to be created in the presenter because the __basic validators__ are defined at presenter level (see [Form Validation](./FORM_VALIDATION.md)).

#### Build error messages

> We put in place a generic helper `getFlatControlErrors` in [__@o3r/forms__](https://github.com/AmadeusITGroup/otter/blob/main/packages/%40o3r/forms/src/core/helpers.ts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We put in place a generic helper [getFlatControlErrors]((https://github.com/AmadeusITGroup/otter/blob/main/packages/%40o3r/forms/src/core/helpers.ts)) in __@o3r/forms__.
```

This function gets a flattened list of all the errors from the form and its descendants and concatenates the __custom errors__.

> The object returned by the helper is of type `ControlFlatErrors` (defined in [__@o3r/forms__](https://github.com/AmadeusITGroup/otter/blob/main/packages/%40o3r/forms/src/core/flat-errors.ts)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The object returned by the helper is of type [ControlFlatErrors](https://github.com/AmadeusITGroup/otter/blob/main/packages/%40o3r/forms/src/core/flat-errors.ts), defined in [__@o3r/forms__].
```

> ```typescript

Reviewer: same comment, should be removed from here

}
```

This is only an example of an implementation. The `translationKey` and `translationParams` can be implemented differently depending on the use cases.

### Display inline error messages

Below, you will find examples of HTML implementations to display basic and custom errors as inline error messages.

#### Basic errors

```html
<!-- presenter template -->
<input type="date" formControlName="dateOfBirth" [id]="id + 'dateOfBirth'"></input>

> <mat-error *ngIf="travelerForm.controls.dateOfBirth.errors?.max">

Reviewer: Should we keep the `mat-error` ?

}
```

In the example above, we save the errors in the store when we execute the submit action. This action can be called at `valueChanges` or `statusChanges` in the presenter.

### Errors translation definition

For the localization of the error messages, we keep the same way of working as we have today (check out [LOCALIZATION](../localization/LOCALIZATION.md)),

> but we have specific places where to define the default translations of error messages.

Reviewer: Where is this specific places ?
I think the place is the same as all others localization key.
maybe we can remove this sentence.

#### Custom errors

Because the form validation depends on business logic and the custom validators are created in the container (see [Form Validation](./FORM_VALIDATION.md)),
we have to provide an error message for each validator and ensure that the message is translatable.
We have to add the default translation keys, corresponding to the custom validators, to the localization file __in the container__.

```typescript
// ---> in container class
/**
 * Localization of the component
 */
@Input()
@Localization('./forms-poc-cont.localization.json')  // Here we will define the translation keys of the error messages
public translations: FormsPocContTranslation;
```

Default values have to be defined for the custom errors, for example:

> ```json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json5
```

...
```

#### Primitive errors

These validators are defined and applied at presenter level, so we have to define the translation of the error messages here.
Each possible validator should have a corresponding error message in the presenter's localization file.

```typescript
// ---> in presenter class
/**
 * Localization of the component
 */
@Input()
@Localization('./forms-pres-pres.localization.json')  // Here we will define the translation keys of the error messages
public translations: FormsPocPresTranslation;
```

Default values have to be defined for the primitive errors, for example:

> ```json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json5
```
